Georg Bücher: Lenz
(translated by: Richard Sieburth: [1999] 2004)

The 20th, Lenz walked through the mountains. Snow on the peaks and upper slopes, gray rock down into the valleys, swatches of green, boulders, and firs. It was sopping cold, the water trickled down the rocks and leapt across the path. The fir boughs sagged in the damp air. Gray clouds drifted across the sky, but everything so stifling, and then the fog floated up and crept heavy and damp through the bushes, so sluggish, so clumsy. He walked onward, caring little one way or another, to him the path mattered not, now up, now down. He felt no fatigue, except sometimes it annoyed him that he could not walk on his head. At first he felt a tightening in his chest when the rocks skittered away, the gray woods below him shook, and the fog now engulfed the shapes, now half-revealed their powerful limbs; things were building up inside him, he was searching for something, as if for lost dreams, but was finding nothing. Everything seemed so small, so near, so wet, he would have liked to set the earth down behind an oven, he could not grasp why it took so much time to clamber down a slope, to reach a distant point; he was convinced he could cover it all with a pair of strides. Only sometimes when the storms tossed the clouds into the valleys and they floated upwards through the woods and voices awakened on the rocks, like far-echoing thunder at first and then approaching in strong gusts, sounding as if they wanted to chant the praises of the earth in their wild rejoicing, and the clouds galloped by like wild whinnying horses and the sunshine shot through them and emerged and drew its glinting sword on the snowfields so that a bright blinding light knifed over the peaks into the valleys; or sometimes when the storms drove the clouds downwards and tore a light-blue lake into them and the sound of the wind died away and then like the murmur of a lullaby or pealing bells rose up again from the depths of ravines and tips of fir trees and a faint reddishness climbed into the deep blue and small clouds drifted by on silver wings and all the mountain peaks, sharp and firm, glinted and gleamed far across the countryside, he would feel something tearing at his chest, he would stand there, gasping, body bent forward, eyes and mouth open wide, he was convinced he should draw the storm into himself, contain everything within himself, he stretched out and lay over the earth, he burrowed into the universe, it was a pleasure that gave him pain; or he would remain still and lay his head upon the moss and half-close his eyes and then everything receded from him, the earth withdrew beneath him, it became as tiny as a wandering star and dipped into a rushing stream whose clear waters flowed beneath him. But these were only moments, and then he got up, calm, steady, quiet, as if a shadow play had passed before him, he had no memory of anything. Toward evening he came to the mountain ridge, to the snowfield from which one again descended westwards into the plain, he sat down at the crest. Things had grown more quiet toward evening; the clouds lay still and solid in the sky, as far as the eye could see, nothing but peaks, broad downward slopes, and everything so silent, gray, twilit; a terrible solitude came over him, he was alone, all alone, he wanted to talk to himself, but he could not, he hardly dared breathe, the crunch of his foot sounded like thunder beneath him, he had to sit down; he was seized by a nameless anxiety in this emptiness, he was in a void, he sprang to his feet and raced down the slope. It had gotten dark, sky and earth melted together. It was as if something were following him, as if something terrible would overtake him, something no human could bear, as if madness were hunting him down on horseback. At last he heard voices, he saw lights, he breathed easier, he was told Waldbach lay half an hour away. He went through the village, lights shone through the windows, as he passed by he saw children at tables, old women, young girls, the faces all calm and quiet, the light seemed to pour forth from them, he felt at ease, he was soon in the parsonage in Waldbach. They were sitting at the table, he went in; curls of blond hair fell around his pale face, his eyes and mouth twitched, his clothes were torn. Oberlin welcomed him, he took him to be a journeyman. “Welcome, whoever you are.”—I am a friend of . . . and bring you greetings from him. “Your name, if you please?” . . . Lenz. “Aha, it’s appeared in print, hasn’t it? Haven’t I read several plays attributed to a gentleman by this name?” Yes, but I beg you not to judge me by that. They continued talking, he searched for words and they came tumbling out, but it was torture; little by little he calmed down, the cozy room and the tranquil faces looming out of the shadows, the bright face of a child on which all the light seemed to rest, trusting eyes raised in curiosity, and finally the mother sitting quietly back in the shadows, angel-like. He began to talk of his homeland; he sketched its various local costumes, they all pressed around him to join in, he immediately felt at home, his pale child’s face now all smiles, his lively talk; he felt at ease, it was as if familiar figures, forgotten faces were emerging from the dark, old songs were awakening, he was away, far away. Finally it was time to go, he was led across the street, the parsonage was too cramped, he was given a room in the schoolhouse. He went upstairs, it was cold up there, a large room, empty, a high bed off to the back, he placed the lamp on the table and paced back and forth, he thought back on the day, how he had come here, where he was, the room in the parsonage with its lights and kindly faces, it seemed like a shadow, a dream, and emptiness came over him again as it had on the mountain, but he could no longer fill it with anything, the lamp was out, the darkness engulfed everything; he was seized by a nameless anxiety, he sprang to his feet, he ran through the room, down the stairs, out of the house; but in vain, everything dark, nothing, he seemed a dream to himself, stray thoughts flitted by, he grasped after them, he felt he had to keep on saying “Our Father” over and over again; he could no longer find himself, a dark instinct drove him to save himself, he butted against rocks, he tore at himself with his nails, the pain began to restore his consciousness, he threw himself into the fountain, but the water was not deep, he splashed around. Then people appeared, they had heard it, they called out to him. Oberlin came running; Lenz had come back to his senses, to the full consciousness of his condition, he felt at ease again, now he was ashamed and sorry to have frightened the good people, he told them it was his custom to take cold baths and returned upstairs; exhaustion allowed him at last to rest.
The next day went well. With Oberlin through the valley on horseback; broad mountain slopes funneling down from great heights into a narrow winding valley leading this way and that to the upper elevations, great boulder fields fanning out at the base, not much woodland, but everything a gray somber cast, a view to the west into the countryside and onto the mountain range running straight from north to south, the peaks looming huge, solemn, or mute and motionless, like a twilit dream. [...] Oberlin was tireless, Lenz his constant companion, now conversing, now attending to affairs, now absorbed in nature. It all had a benign and calming effect on him, he often had to look into Oberlin’s eyes, and the immense peace that comes over us in the tranquility of nature, in the middle of the woods, on liquid moonlit summer nights, appeared even closer to him in this quiet gaze, this noble solemn face. He was shy, but he made observations, he spoke, Oberlin found his conversation agreeable, and the childish charm of Lenz’s face gave him great pleasure. But things were only bearable for him as long as the light lay in the valley; towards evening he was seized by a strange anxiety, he wanted to chase after the sun; as objects gradually grew more shadowy, everything seemed so dreamlike, so menacing, he felt the anxiety of children who sleep in the dark; it was as if he were blind; now it was intensifying, the nightmare of madness was settling at his feet, the hopeless realization that everything was merely his dream opened before him, he clung to every object, figures fled by him, he pressed toward them, they were shadows, life drained from him and his limbs went stiff. He spoke, he sang, he recited passages from Shakespeare, he grasped after everything that used to make his blood race, he tried everything, but cold, cold. [...]
The snow was gone from the small churchyard, dark moss beneath the black crosses, a late rosebush leaning against the cemetery wall, late flowers rising through the moss, sun at moments, then the dark. The service began, human voices joined into a pure clear sound; the impression of gazing into a pure transparent mountain stream. The singing trailed off, Lenz spoke, he was shy, the music had completely melted his paralysis away, all his pain was now awake and lay within his heart. He was suffused with a sweet sense of infinite well-being. He spoke simply to the people, they shared in his suffering, and it was comforting that he could offer sleep to various eyes tired from crying and peace to tortured hearts, that he could show the way to heaven to existences tortured by material needs, all these muffled sorrows. He had grown more steady as he came to the end, then the voices began again:
Burst, O divine woe,
The floodgates of my soul;
May pain be my reward,
In pain I love the Lord.
[...]
The following morning he came down, he very calmly told Oberlin how his mother had appeared to him in the night; she had emerged from the dark churchyard wall in a white dress and had a white and a red rose pinned to her chest; she had then sunk into a corner and the roses had slowly grown over her, she had no doubt died; he had felt quite calm about this. Oberlin then remarked that when his father died he was alone in the fields and had then heard a voice so that he knew his father was dead and when he came back home this was indeed so. This led them further, Oberlin spoke of the mountain people, of girls who could detect water and metal under the ground, of men who had been possessed on certain peaks and wrestled with spirits; he also told of how he had once been transported into a state of somnambulism upon looking into the empty depths of a mountain pool. [...]
Around this time Kaufmann arrived in Steintal with his bride-to-be. Lenz was at first uneasy about meeting him, he had carved out such a nice little place for himself, this tiny bit of peace was so precious to him, and now someone was coming his way who reminded him of so much, with whom he had to speak, converse, who knew of his situation. Oberlin knew nothing at all; he had taken him in, cared for him; for him it was the hand of God that had sent this unfortunate creature his way, he loved him dearly. Besides, it was fitting that he be there, he belonged among them as if he had been there forever, and no one asked from where he had come and where he was bound. At table Lenz was again in fine spirits, the talk turned to literature, he was in his element; the era of idealism was just then beginning, Kaufmann was among its adherents, Lenz vehemently disagreed. He said: the writers who were purported to offer up reality had no idea of what it was, even though they were more bearable than those who wanted to transfigure it. He said: the good Lord has without a doubt made the world as it should be and there is no way we can scratch together anything better, our sole goal should be to imitate him in a small way. What I demand in all things is life, the potentiality of existence, and that’s that; we need not then ask whether it be beautiful or ugly, the feeling that whatever’s been created possesses life outweighs these two and should be the sole criterion in matters of art. As it is, we encounter it rarely, we find it in Shakespeare and it rings forth fully in folk songs, now and then in Goethe [...] — He continued on in this fashion, people listened attentively, many points were being made, he had grown flush from all the talking, now all smiles, now serious, he tossed his curls of blond hair. He had completely forgotten himself. After the meal Kaufmann drew him aside. He had received letters from Lenz’s father, his son was to return, provide assistance. Kaufmann told him he was throwing away his life here, squandering it to no purpose, he should set himself a goal and so on and so forth. [...]
The following morning Lenz was slow to appear. Finally Oberlin went up to his room, he was lying in bed calmly, not budging. Oberlin had to repeat his questions at length before getting an answer: Yes, Reverend, you see, boredom! Boredom! O, sheer boredom, what more can I say, I have already drawn all the figures on the wall. Oberlin said to him he should turn to God; he laughed and said: if I were as lucky as you to have discovered such an agreeable pastime, yes, one could indeed wile away one’s time that way. Tedium the root of it all. Most people pray only out of boredom; others fall in love out of boredom, still others are virtuous or depraved, but I am nothing, nothing at all, I cannot even kill myself: too boring:
O God, drowned in thy waves of light,
Imprisoned by thy midday bright,
My waking eyes are dreadful sore,
O will the night come nevermore?
Oberlin looked at him indignantly and made to leave. Lenz rushed after him and with a weird look in his eye: you see, I’ve just had this idea, if I could only determine whether I’m dreaming or waking: you see, it’s a fine idea, let’s try it out; and he slipped back into bed. [...]
[Lenz] also experienced these attacks during the day, they were even more frightful then; the light of day had previously warded them off. At these moments it seemed to him as if he alone existed, as if the world lay only in his imagination, as if there were nothing but himself, eternally damned, Satan himself; alone, tormented by his imaginings. [...]
A moment later something crashed into the courtyard with such a loud thud that Oberlin could not conceive it could have been made by a person falling. The nursemaid came, deathly pale and trembling all over. [...]
Lenz sat in the coach with cold resignation as they drove out of the valley toward the west. He cared little where they were taking him; on the several occasions when the coach was put at risk by the bad road, he remained seated quite calmly; nothing mattered to him at all. In this condition he traversed the mountains. Towards evening they reached the valley of the Rhine. Little by little they left the mountains behind, now rising in the red glow of dusk like a wave of dark blue crystal and on whose warm crest the red rays of evening played; above the plain at the foot of the mountains lay a shimmering bluish web. Night was falling as they approached Strasbourg; a high full moon, all the distant objects dark, only the nearby mountain forming a sharp line, the earth like a golden goblet over whose rim the golden ripples of the moon foamed. Lenz stared out quietly, no misgivings, no stress, just a dull anxiety building up inside him the more the objects disappeared into the dark. They had to stop over for the night, he made several more attempts on his life but was too closely watched. The following morning he entered Strasbourg under dreary rainy skies. He seemed quite rational, conversed with people; he acted like everybody else, but a terrible emptiness lay within him, he felt no more anxiety, no desire; he saw his existence as a necessary burden. — And so he lived on.
 
 
 

