ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND.


BY
LEWIS CARROLL.


1866

ALICE was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank, and of having nothing
to do: once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures
or conversations in it, "and what is the use of a book," thought Alice, "without pictures or
conversations?
"
So she was considering in her own mind, (as well as she could, for the hot day made her feel very
sleepy and stupid,) whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of
getting up and picking the daisies, when suddenly a white rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her.

There was nothing so very remarkable in that; nor did Alice think it so very much out of the way
to hear the Rabbit say to itself, "Oh dear!
Oh dear!
I shall be too late!"
(when she thought it
over afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this, but at the time it
all seemed quite natural;) but when the Rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket,
and looked at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind
that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take out of
it, and, burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after it, and was just in time to see
it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge.

In another moment down went Alice after it, never once considering how in the world she was to
get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and then dipped suddenly down, so
suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself
falling down what seemed to be a very deep well.


Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she went
down to look about her, and to wonder what was going to happen next.
[...] "Well!" thought Alice to
herself, "after such a fall as this, I shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs!
How brave
they'll all think me at home!
Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even if I fell off the top
of the house!"
(Which was very likely true.)

Down, down, down.
Would the fall never come to an end!
"I wonder how many miles I've fallen by
this time'?"
she said aloud.
"I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth.
Let me
see: that would be four thousand miles down, I think—" [...] "—yes, that's about the right
distance—but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I've got to?"
(Alice had not the slightest
idea what Latitude was, or Longitude either, but she thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Down, down, down.
There was nothing else to do, so Alice soon began talking again.
"Dinah'll miss
me very much to-night, I should think!"
(Dinah was the cat.)
"I hope they'll remember her saucer
of milk at tea-time.
Dinah, my dear!
I wish you were down here with me!
There are no mice in the
air, I'm afraid, but you might catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know.
But do cats
eat bats, I wonder?"
And here Alice began to get rather sleepy, and went on saying to herself, in
a dreamy sort of way, "Do cats eat bats?
Do cats eat bats?" and sometimes, "Do bats eat cats?"
for, you see, as she couldn't answer either question, it didn't much matter which way she put it.

She felt that she was dozing off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand
with Dinah, and was saying to her very earnestly, "Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever
eat a bat?"
when suddenly, thump!
thump!
down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves, and
the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment: she looked up, but it was
all dark overhead; before her was another long passage, and the White Rabbit was still in sight,
hurrying down it.
There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like the wind, and was just
in time to hear it say, as it turned a corner, "Oh my ears and whiskers, how late it's getting!"

She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen: she
found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof.

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the
way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on
it but a tiny golden key, and Alice's first idea was that this might belong to one of the doors
of the hall; but, alas!
either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any
rate it would not open any of them.
However, on the second time round, she came upon a low
curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high:
she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a
rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw.
How
she longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and
those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the doorway; "and even if my
head would go through," thought poor Alice, "it would be of very little use without my shoulders.


Oh, how I wish I could shut up like a telescope!
I think I could, if I only knew how to begin.
"
For, you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that Alice had begun to think
that very few things indeed were really impossible.

There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door, so she went back to the table, half
hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up
like telescopes: this time she found a little bottle on it, ("which certainly was not here
before," said Alice,) and tied round the neck of the bottle was a paper label, with the words
"DRINK ME," beautifully printed on it in large letters.

It was all very well to say "Drink me," but the wise little Alice was not going to do that in a
hurry.
"No, I'll look first," she said, "and see whether it's marked 'poison' or not;" for she
had read several nice little stories about children who had got burnt, and eaten up by wild
beasts and other unpleasant things, all because they would not remember the simple rules their
friends had taught them: such as, that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long; and
that if you cut your finger very deeply with a knife, it usually bleeds; and she had never
forgotten that, if you drink much from a bottle marked "poison," it is almost certain to disagree
with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was not marked "poison," so Alice ventured to taste it, and finding it very
nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast
turkey, toffee, and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.


*⁠*⁠*⁠*
*⁠*⁠*
*⁠*⁠*⁠*

"What a curious feeling!" said Alice; "I must be shutting up like a telescope."

[...]
After a while, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going into the garden at once;
but, alas for poor Alice!
when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the little golden
key, and when she went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach it: she
could see it quite plainly through the glass, and she tried her best to climb up one of the legs
of the table, but it was too slippery; and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor
little thing sat down and cried.

"Come, there's no use in crying like that!" said Alice to herself, rather sharply; "I advise you
to leave off this minute!"
She generally gave herself very good advice, (though she very seldom
followed it,) and sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her eyes; and
once she remembered trying to box her own ears for having cheated herself in a game of croquet
she was playing against herself, for this curious child was very fond of pretending to be two
people.
"But it's no use now," thought poor Alice, "to pretend to be two people!
Why, there's
hardly enough of me left to make one respectable person!"

[...]
In a little while, however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance, and
she looked up eagerly [...].


IT was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking anxiously about as it went, as
if it had lost something; and she heard it muttering to itself, "The Duchess!
The Duchess!
Oh my
dear paws!
Oh my fur and whiskers!
She'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are ferrets!
Where
can I have dropped them, I wonder?"
[...]
Very soon the rabbit noticed Alice, as she went hunting about, and called out to her in an angry
tone, "Why, Mary Ann, what are you doing out here?
Run home this moment, and fetch me a pair of
gloves and a fan!
Quick, now!"
And Alice was so much frightened that she ran off at once in the
direction it pointed to, without trying to explain the mistake that it had made.

"He took me for his housemaid," she said to herself as she ran.
"How surprised he'll be when he
finds out who I am!
But I'd better take him his fan and gloves—that is, if I can find them."
As
she said this, she came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass plate
with the name "W. RABBIT" engraved upon it.
She went in without knocking, and hurried upstairs,
in great fear lest she should meet the real Mary Ann, and be turned out of the house before she
had found the fan and gloves.

"How queer it seems," Alice said to herself, "to be going messages for a rabbit!
I suppose
Dinah'll be sending me on messages next!"
And she began fancying the sort of thing that would
happen: "'Miss Alice!
Come here directly, and get ready for your walk!'
'Coming in a minute,
nurse!
But I've got to watch this mouse-hole till Dinah comes back, and see that the mouse
doesn't get out.'
Only I don't think," Alice went on, "that they'd let Dinah stop in the house if
it began ordering people about like that!"

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room with a table in the window, and on it
(as she had hoped) a fan and two or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up the fan and
a pair of the gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye fell upon a little
bottle that stood near the looking-glass.
There was no label this time with the words "DRINK ME,"
but nevertheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips.
"I know something interesting is sure to
happen," she said to herself, "whenever I eat or drink anything; so I'll just see what this
bottle does.
I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for really I'm quite tired of being such a
tiny little thing!"

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she had expected: before she had drunk half the bottle,
she found her head pressing against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken.
She hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself, "That's quite enough—I hope I shan't
grow any more—As it is, I can't get out at the door—I do wish I hadn't drunk quite so much!"

Alas!
it was too late to wish that!
She went on growing, and growing, and very soon had to kneel
down on the floor: in another minute there was not even room for this, and she tried the effect
of lying down with one elbow against the door, and the other arm curled round her head.
Still she
went on growing, and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window, and one foot up the
chimney, and said to herself, "Now I can do no more, whatever happens.
What will become of me?"
Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect, and she grew no larger:
still it was very uncomfortable, and as there seemed to be no sort of chance of her ever getting
out of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy.

"It was much pleasanter at home," thought poor Alice, "when one wasn't always growing larger and
smaller, and being ordered about by mice and rabbits.
I almost wish I hadn't gone down that
rabbit-hole—and yet—and yet—it's rather curious, you know, this sort of life!
I do wonder what
can have happened to me!
When I used to read fairy-tales, I fancied that kind of thing never
happened, and now here I am in the middle of one!
There ought to be a book written about me, that
there ought!
And when I grow up, I'll write one—but I'm grown up now," she added in a sorrowful
tone, "at least there's no room to grow up any more here.
"
"But then," thought Alice, "shall I never get any older than I am now?
That'll be a comfort, one
way—never to be an old woman—but then—always to have lessons to learn!
Oh, I shouldn't like
that!"


"Oh, you foolish Alice!"
she answered herself.
"How can you learn lessons in here?
Why, there's
hardly room for you, and no room at all for any lesson-books!"

And so she went on, taking first one side and then the other, and making quite a conversation of
it altogether; but after a few minutes she heard a voice outside, and stopped to listen.

"Mary Ann!
Mary Ann!" said the voice, "fetch me my gloves this moment!"
Then came a little
pattering of feet on the stairs.
Alice knew it was the Rabbit coming to look for her, and she
trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as
large as the Rabbit, and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door, and tried to open it; but as the door opened inwards,
and Alice's elbow was pressed hard against it, that attempt proved a failure.
Alice heard it say
to itself, "Then I'll go round and get in at the window.
"
"That you won't!"
thought Alice, and, after waiting till she fancied she heard the Rabbit just
under the window she suddenly spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air.
She did not get
hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall, and a crash of broken glass, from
which she concluded that it was just possible, it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or something
of the sort.

Next came an angry voice—the Rabbit's—"Pat!
Pat!
Where are you?"
And then a voice she had never
heard before, "Sure then I'm here!
Digging for apples, yer honour!
"
"Digging for apples, indeed!" said the Rabbit angrily.
"Here!
Come and help me out of this!"

(Sounds of more broken glass.)

"Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window?
"
"Sure, it's an arm, yer honour!"
(He pronounced it "arrum.")
"An arm, you goose!
Who ever saw one that size?
Why, it fills the whole window!
"
"Sure, it does, yer honour: but it's an arm for all that.
"
"Well, it's got no business there, at any rate: go and take it away!"

[...] After a minute or two, they began moving about again, and Alice heard the Rabbit say, "A
barrowful will do, to begin with.
"
"A barrowful of what?" thought Alice; but she had not long to doubt, for the next moment a shower
of little pebbles came rattling in at the window, and some of them hit her in the face.
"I'll put
a stop to this," she said to herself, and shouted out, "You'd better not do that again!"
which
produced another dead silence.

Alice noticed with some surprise that the pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they lay
on the floor, and a bright idea came into her head.
"If I eat one of these cakes," she thought,
"it's sure to make some change in my size; and as it can't possibly make me larger, it must make
me smaller, I suppose.
"
So she swallowed one of the cakes, and was delighted to find that she began shrinking directly.

As soon as she was small enough to get through the door, she ran out of the house, and found
quite a crowd of little animals and birds waiting outside.
The poor little Lizard, Bill, was in
the middle, being held up by two guinea-pigs, who were giving it something out of a bottle.
They
all made a rush at Alice the moment she appeared; but she ran off as hard as she could, and
soon
found herself safe in a thick wood.


"The first thing I've got to do," said Alice to herself, as she wandered about in the wood, "is
to grow to my right size again; and the second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden.
I
think that will be the best plan."

[...]
Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a door leading right into it.


"That's very curious!"
she thought.
"But everything's curious to-day.
I think I may as well go in
at once."
And in she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the little glass table.
"Now, I'll
manage better this time," she said to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden.
Then she set to work nibbling at the mushroom (she
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high: then she walked down the
little passage: and then—she found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright
flower-beds and the cool fountains.


A LARGE rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the roses growing on it were white, but
there were three gardeners at it, busily painting them red.
Alice thought this a very curious
thing, and she went nearer to watch them, and just as she came up to them she heard one of them
say, "Look out now.
Five!
Don't go splashing paint over me like that!"

"I couldn't help it," said Five, in a sulky tone; "Seven jogged my elbow.
"
On which Seven looked up and said, "That's right, Five!
Always lay the blame on others!"

"You'd better not talk!"
said Five.
"I heard the Queen say only yesterday you deserved to be
beheaded!"
"What for?" said the one who had spoken first.


"That's none of your business, Two!" said Seven.

"Yes, it is his business!"
said Five, "and I'll tell him—it was for bringing the cook tulip-roots
instead of onions.
"
Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun, "Well, of all the unjust things—" when his eye
chanced to fall upon Alice, as she stood watching them, and he checked himself suddenly: the
others looked round also, and all of them bowed low.

"Would you tell me, please," said Alice, a little timidly, "why you are painting those roses?
"
Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two.
Two began, in a low voice, "Why, the fact is, you
see, Miss, this here ought to have been a red rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake;
and if the Queen was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know.
So you see,
Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to—" At this moment Five, who had been anxiously
looking across the garden, called out "The Queen!
The Queen!"
and the three gardeners instantly
threw themselves flat upon their faces.
There was a sound of many footsteps, and Alice looked
round, eager to see the Queen.

[...] Alice was rather doubtful whether she ought not to lie down on her face like the three
gardeners, but she could not remember ever having heard of such a rule at processions; "and
besides, what would be the use of a procession," thought she, "if people had all to lie down on
their faces, so that they couldn't see it?"
So she stood where she was, and waited.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked at her, and the Queen
said severely, "Who is this?"
She said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in
reply.

"Idiot!" said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to Alice, she went on,
"What's your name, child?"
"My name is Alice, so please your Majesty," said Alice very politely; but she added, to herself,
"Why, they're only a pack of cards, after all.
I needn't be afraid of them!"

[...] "Hold your tongue!"
said the Queen, turning purple.

"I won't!"
said Alice.

"Off with her head!"
the Queen shouted at the top of her voice.
Nobody moved.

"Who cares for you?" said Alice, [...]
"You're nothing but a pack of cards!"

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon her; she gave a little
scream, half of fright and half of anger, and tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on
the bank, with her head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead leaves
that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

"Wake up, Alice dear!"
said her sister; "why, what a long sleep you've had!"
"Oh, I've had such a curious dream!"
said Alice, and she told her sister, as well as she could
remember them, all these strange Adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and
when she had finished, her sister kissed her, and said, "It was a curious dream, dear, certainly:
but now run in to your tea; it's getting late."
So Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she
ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had been.


But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her hand, watching the setting
sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming
after a fashion, and this was her dream:—
First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny hands were clasped upon her
knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking up into hers—she could hear the very tones of her
voice, and see that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that would
always get into her eyes—and still as she listened, or seemed to listen, the whole place around
her became alive with the strange creatures of her little sister's dream.

[...]

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in Wonderland, though she knew she had
but to open them again and all would change to dull reality—the grass would be only rustling in
the wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds—the rattling teacups would change to
tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen's shrill cries to the voice of the shepherd boy—and the
sneeze of the baby, the shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she
knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard—while the lowing of the cattle in the
distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's heavy sobs.


Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers would, in the after-time, be
herself a grown woman; and how she would keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving
heart of her childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and make their
eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of
long-ago: and how she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their
simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.


THE END.



