Bartleby the Scrivener  (1856)  by Herman Melville
A Story of Wall-Street	

I am a rather elderly man.
The nature of my avocations for the last thirty years has brought me
into more than ordinary contact with what would seem an interesting and somewhat singular set of
men, of whom as yet nothing that I know of has ever been written:—I mean the law-copyists or
scriveners.
[...]
Bartleby was one of those beings of whom nothing is
ascertainable, except from the original sources, and in his case those are very small.
What my
own astonished eyes saw of Bartleby, that is all I know of him, except, indeed, one vague report
which will appear in the sequel.


[...]

At the period just preceding the advent of Bartleby, I had two persons as copyists in my employment, 
and a promising lad as an office-boy.
First, Turkey; second, Nippers; third, Ginger Nut.


[...]

Now my original business—that of a conveyancer and title hunter, and drawer-up of recondite
documents of all sorts—was considerably increased by receiving the master's office.
There was now
great work for scriveners.
Not only must I push the clerks already with me, but I must have
additional help.
In answer to my advertisement, a motionless young man one morning, stood upon my
office threshold, the door being open, for it was summer.
I can see that figure now—pallidly
neat, pitiably respectable, incurably forlorn!
It was Bartleby.


[...]

I should have stated before that ground glass folding-doors divided my premises into two parts,
one of which was occupied by my scriveners, the other by myself.
According to my humor I threw
open these doors, or closed them.
I resolved to assign Bartleby a corner by the folding-doors,
but on my side of them, so as to have this quiet man within easy call, in case any trifling thing
was to be done.
I placed his desk close up to a small side-window in that part of the room, a
window which originally had afforded a lateral view of certain grimy back-yards and bricks, but
which, owing to subsequent erections, commanded at present no view at all, though it gave some
light.
Within three feet of the panes was a wall, and the light came down from far above, between
two lofty buildings, as from a very small opening in a dome.
Still further to a satisfactory
arrangement, I procured a high green folding screen, which might entirely isolate Bartleby from
my sight, though not remove him from my voice.
And thus, in a manner, privacy and society were
conjoined.


At first Bartleby did an extraordinary quantity of writing.
As if long famishing for something to
copy, he seemed to gorge himself on my documents.
There was no pause for digestion.
He ran a day
and night line, copying by sun-light and by candle-light.
I should have been quite delighted with
his application, had he been cheerfully industrious.
But he wrote on silently, palely,
mechanically.


[...]

A few days after this, Bartleby concluded four lengthy documents, being quadruplicates of a
week's testimony taken before me in my High Court of Chancery.
It became necessary to examine
them.
It was an important suit, and great accuracy was imperative.
Having all things arranged I
called Turkey, Nippers and Ginger Nut from the next room, meaning to place the four copies in the
hands of my four clerks, while I should read from the original.
Accordingly Turkey, Nippers and
Ginger Nut had taken their seats in a row, each with his document in hand, when I called to
Bartleby to join this interesting group.


“Bartleby!
quick, I am waiting.”


I heard a slow scrape of his chair legs on the uncarpeted floor, and soon he appeared standing at
the entrance of his hermitage.


“What is wanted?” said he mildly.


“The copies, the copies,” said I hurriedly.
“We are going to examine them.
There”—and I held
towards him the fourth quadruplicate.


“I would prefer not to,” he said, and gently disappeared behind the screen.


For a few moments I was turned into a pillar of salt, standing at the head of my seated column of
clerks.
Recovering myself, I advanced towards the screen, and demanded the reason for such
extraordinary conduct.


“Why do you refuse?”


“I would prefer not to.”


With any other man I should have flown outright into a dreadful passion, scorned all further
words, and thrust him ignominiously from my presence.
But there was something about Bartleby that
not only strangely disarmed me, but in a wonderful manner touched and disconcerted me.
I began to
reason with him.


“These are your own copies we are about to examine.
It is labor saving to you, because one
examination will answer for your four papers.
It is common usage.
Every copyist is bound to help
examine his copy.
Is it not so?
Will you not speak?
Answer!”


“I prefer not to,” he replied in a flute-like tone.
It seemed to me that while I had been
addressing him, he carefully revolved every statement that I made; fully comprehended the
meaning; could not gainsay the irresistible conclusions; but, at the same time, some paramount
consideration prevailed with him to reply as he did.


“You are decided, then, not to comply with my request—a request made according to common usage
and common sense?”


He briefly gave me to understand that on that point my judgment was sound.
Yes: his decision was
irreversible.


[...]

Shall I acknowledge it?
The conclusion of this whole business was, that it soon became a fixed
fact of my chambers, that a pale young scrivener, by the name of Bartleby, had a desk there; that
he copied for me at the usual rate of four cents a folio (one hundred words); but he was
permanently exempt from examining the work done by him, that duty being transferred to Turkey and
Nippers, one of compliment doubtless to their superior acuteness; moreover, said Bartleby was
never on any account to be dispatched on the most trivial errand of any sort; and that even if
entreated to take upon him such a matter, it was generally understood that he would prefer not
to—in other words, that he would refuse pointblank.


[...]

Here it must be said, that according to the custom of most legal gentlemen occupying chambers in
densely-populated law buildings, there were several keys to my door.
One was kept by a woman
residing in the attic, which person weekly scrubbed and daily swept and dusted my apartments.

Another was kept by Turkey for convenience sake.
The third I sometimes carried in my own pocket.

The fourth I knew not who had.


Now, one Sunday morning I happened to go to Trinity Church, to hear a celebrated preacher, and
finding myself rather early on the ground, I thought I would walk around to my chambers for a
while.
Luckily I had my key with me; but upon applying it to the lock, I found it resisted by
something inserted from the inside.
Quite surprised, I called out; when to my consternation a key
was turned from within; and thrusting his lean visage at me, and holding the door ajar, the
apparition of Bartleby appeared, in his shirt sleeves, and otherwise in a strangely tattered
dishabille, saying quietly that he was sorry, but he was deeply engaged just then, and—preferred
not admitting me at present.
In a brief word or two, he moreover added, that perhaps I had better
walk round the block two or three times, and by that time he would probably have concluded his
affairs.


Now, the utterly unsurmised appearance of Bartleby, tenanting my law-chambers of a Sunday
morning, with his cadaverously gentlemanly nonchalance, yet withal firm and self-possessed, had
such a strange effect upon me, that incontinently I slunk away from my own door, and did as
desired.
[...]

Nevertheless, my mind was not pacified; and full of a restless curiosity, at last I returned to
the door.
Without hindrance I inserted my key, opened it, and entered.
Bartleby was not to be
seen.
I looked round anxiously, peeped behind his screen; but it was very plain that he was gone.

Upon more closely examining the place, I surmised that for an indefinite period Bartleby must
have ate, dressed, and slept in my office, and that too without plate, mirror, or bed.
The
cushioned seat of a rickety old sofa in one corner bore the faint impress of a lean, reclining
form.
Rolled away under his desk, I found a blanket; under the empty grate, a blacking box and
brush; on a chair, a tin basin, with soap and a ragged towel; in a newspaper a few crumbs of
ginger-nuts and a morsel of cheese.
[...]

Suddenly I was attracted by Bartleby's closed desk, the key in open sight left in the lock.


I mean no mischief, seek the gratification of no heartless curiosity, thought I; besides, the
desk is mine, and its contents too, so I will make bold to look within.
Every thing was
methodically arranged, the papers smoothly placed.
The pigeon holes were deep, and removing the
files of documents, I groped into their recesses.
Presently I felt something there, and dragged
it out.
It was an old bandanna handkerchief, heavy and knotted.
I opened it, and saw it was a
savings' bank.


I now recalled all the quiet mysteries which I had noted in the man.
I remembered that he never
spoke but to answer; that though at intervals he had considerable time to himself, yet I had
never seen him reading—no, not even a newspaper; that for long periods he would stand looking
out, at his pale window behind the screen, upon the dead brick wall [...].
And more
than all, I remembered a certain unconscious air of pallid—how shall I call it?—of pallid
haughtiness, say, or rather an austere reserve about him, which had positively awed me into my
tame compliance with his eccentricities, when I had feared to ask him to do the slightest
incidental thing for me, even though I might know, from his long-continued motionlessness, that
behind his screen he must be standing in one of those dead-wall reveries of his.


Revolving all these things, and coupling them with the recently discovered fact that he made my
office his constant abiding place and home, and not forgetful of his morbid moodiness; revolving
all these things, a prudential feeling began to steal over me.
My first emotions had been those
of pure melancholy and sincerest pity; but just in proportion as the forlornness of Bartleby grew
and grew to my imagination, did that same melancholy merge into fear, that pity into repulsion.

[...] 

The next day I noticed that Bartleby did nothing but stand at his window in his dead-wall revery.

Upon asking him why he did not write, he said that he had decided upon doing no more writing.


“Why, how now?
what next?” exclaimed I, “do no more writing?”


“No more.”


“And what is the reason?”


“Do you not see the reason for yourself,” he indifferently replied.


I looked steadfastly at him, and perceived that his eyes looked dull and glazed.
Instantly it
occurred to me, that his unexampled diligence in copying by his dim window for the first few
weeks of his stay with me might have temporarily impaired his vision.


I was touched.
I said something in condolence with him.
[...]

Still added days went by.
Whether Bartleby's eyes improved or not, I could not say.
To all
appearance, I thought they did.
But when I asked him if they did, he vouchsafed no answer.
At all
events, he would do no copying.
At last, in reply to my urgings, he informed me that he had
permanently given up copying.


“What!” exclaimed I; “suppose your eyes should get entirely well—better than ever before—would
you not copy then?”


“I have given up copying,” he answered, and slid aside.


[...]
Decently as I could, I told Bartleby that in six days' time he must
unconditionally leave the office.
I warned him to take measures, in the interval, for procuring
some other abode.
I offered to assist him in this endeavor, if he himself would but take the
first step towards a removal.
“And when you finally quit me, Bartleby,” added I, “I shall see
that you go not away entirely unprovided.
Six days from this hour, remember.”


At the expiration of that period, I peeped behind the screen, and lo!
Bartleby was there.



[...]
“Bartleby,” said I, entering the office, with a quietly severe expression, “I am seriously
displeased.
I am pained, Bartleby.
I had thought better of you.
I had imagined you of such a
gentlemanly organization, that in any delicate dilemma a slight hint would suffice—in short, an
assumption.
But it appears I am deceived.”
[...]

He answered nothing.


“Will you, or will you not, quit me?”
I now demanded in a sudden passion, advancing close to him.


“I would prefer not to quit you,” he replied, gently emphasizing the not.


“What earthly right have you to stay here?
Do you pay any rent?
Do you pay my taxes?
Or is this
property yours?”


He answered nothing.


“Are you ready to go on and write now?
Are your eyes recovered?
Could you copy a small paper for
me this morning?
or help examine a few lines?
or step round to the post-office?
In a word, will
you do any thing at all, to give a coloring to your refusal to depart the premises?”


He silently retired into his hermitage.


[...]

At last I was made aware that all through the circle of my professional acquaintance, a whisper of wonder was running round, having
reference to the strange creature I kept at my office.
This worried me very much.
[...] I resolved to gather
all my faculties together, and for ever rid me of this intolerable incubus.


Ere revolving any complicated project, however, adapted to this end, I first simply suggested to
Bartleby the propriety of his permanent departure.
In a calm and serious tone, I commended the
idea to his careful and mature consideration.
But having taken three days to meditate upon it, he
apprised me that his original determination remained the same; in short, that he still preferred
to abide with me.


[...]
No more then.
Since he will not quit me, I must quit
him.
I will change my offices; I will move elsewhere; and give him fair notice, that if I find
him on my new premises I will then proceed against him as a common trespasser.


Acting accordingly, next day I thus addressed him: “I find these chambers too far from the City
Hall; the air is unwholesome.
In a word, I propose to remove my offices next week, and shall no
longer require your services.
I tell you this now, in order that you may seek another place.”


He made no reply, and nothing more was said.


On the appointed day I engaged carts and men, proceeded to my chambers, and having but little
furniture, every thing was removed in a few hours.
Throughout, the scrivener remained standing
behind the screen, which I directed to be removed the last thing.
It was withdrawn; and being
folded up like a huge folio, left him the motionless occupant of a naked room.

[...]

Established in my new quarters, for a day or two I kept the door locked, and started at every
footfall in the passages.
When I returned to my rooms after any little absence, I would pause at
the threshold for an instant, and attentively listen, ere applying my key.
But these fears were
needless.
Bartleby never came nigh me.


I thought all was going well, when a perturbed looking stranger visited me, inquiring whether I
was the person who had recently occupied rooms at No.—Wall-street.


Full of forebodings, I replied that I was.


“Then sir,” said the stranger, who proved a lawyer, “you are responsible for the man you left
there.
He refuses to do any copying; he refuses to do any thing; he says he prefers not to; and
he refuses to quit the premises.”


“I am very sorry, sir,” said I, with assumed tranquility, but an inward tremor, “but, really, the
man you allude to is nothing to me—he is no relation or apprentice of mine, that you should hold
me responsible for him.”


“In mercy's name, who is he?”


“I certainly cannot inform you.
I know nothing about him.
Formerly I employed him as a copyist;
but he has done nothing for me now for some time past.”


“I shall settle him then,—good morning, sir.”


Several days passed, and I heard nothing more; and though I often felt a charitable prompting to
call at the place and see poor Bartleby, yet a certain squeamishness of I know not what withheld
me.


All is over with him, by this time, thought I at last, when through another week no further
intelligence reached me.
But coming to my room the day after, I found several persons waiting at
my door in a high state of nervous excitement.


“That's the man—here he comes,” cried the foremost one, whom I recognized as the lawyer who had
previously called upon me alone.


“You must take him away, sir, at once,” cried a portly person among them, advancing upon me, and
whom I knew to be the landlord of No.—Wall-street.
“These gentlemen, my tenants, cannot stand it
any longer; Mr. B—” pointing to the lawyer, “has turned him out of his room, and he now persists
in haunting the building generally, sitting upon the banisters of the stairs by day, and sleeping
in the entry by night.
Every body is concerned; clients are leaving the offices; some fears are
entertained of a mob; something you must do, and that without delay.”


Aghast at this torrent, I fell back before it, and would fain have locked myself in my new
quarters.
In vain I persisted that Bartleby was nothing to me—no more than to any one else.
In
vain:—I was the last person known to have any thing to do with him, and they held me to the
terrible account.
Fearful then of being exposed in the papers (as one person present obscurely
threatened) I considered the matter, and at length said, that if the lawyer would give me a
confidential interview with the scrivener, in his (the lawyer's) own room, I would that afternoon
strive my best to rid them of the nuisance they complained of.


Going up stairs to my old haunt, there was Bartleby silently sitting upon the banister at the
landing.


“What are you doing here, Bartleby?” said I.

“Sitting upon the banister,” he mildly replied.


I motioned him into the lawyer's room, who then left us.


[...]

“Now one of two things must take place.
Either you must do something, or something must be done
to you.
Now what sort of business would you like to engage in?
Would you like to re-engage in
copying for some one?”


“No; I would prefer not to make any change.”


[...]
Despairing of all further efforts, I was precipitately leaving him, when a final thought occurred 
to me—one which had not been wholly unindulged before.


“Bartleby,” said I, in the kindest tone I could assume under such exciting circumstances, “will
you go home with me now—not to my office, but my dwelling—and remain there till we can conclude
upon some convenient arrangement for you at our leisure?
Come, let us start now, right away.”


“No: at present I would prefer not to make any change at all.”


I answered nothing; but effectually dodging every one by the suddenness and rapidity of my
flight, rushed from the building, ran up Wall-street towards Broadway, and jumping into the first
omnibus was soon removed from pursuit.
[...]
So fearful was I of being again hunted out by the 
incensed landlord and his exasperated tenants, that, surrendering my business to Nippers, for a 
few days I drove about the upper part of the town and through the suburbs, in my rockaway; crossed 
over to Jersey City and Hoboken, and paid fugitive visits to Manhattanville and Astoria.
In fact 
I almost lived in my rockaway for the time.


When again I entered my office, lo, a note from the landlord lay upon the desk.
I opened it with
trembling hands.
It informed me that the writer had sent to the police, and had Bartleby removed
to the Tombs as a vagrant.
Moreover, since I knew more about him than any one else, he wished me
to appear at that place, and make a suitable statement of the facts.
These tidings had a
conflicting effect upon me.
At first I was indignant; but at last almost approved.
The landlord's
energetic, summary disposition had led him to adopt a procedure which I do not think I would have
decided upon myself; and yet as a last resort, under such peculiar circumstances, it seemed the
only plan.


As I afterwards learned, the poor scrivener, when told that he must be conducted to the Tombs,
offered not the slightest obstacle, but in his pale unmoving way, silently acquiesced.


[...]

Being under no disgraceful charge, and quite serene and harmless in all his ways, they had
permitted him freely to wander about the prison, and especially in the inclosed grass-platted
yard thereof.
And so I found him there, standing all alone in the quietest of the yards, his face
towards a high wall, while all around, from the narrow slits of the jail windows, I thought I saw
peering out upon him the eyes of murderers and thieves.


“Bartleby!”


“I know you,” he said, without looking round,—“and
I want nothing to say to you.”


“It was not I that brought you here, Bartleby,” said I, keenly pained at his implied suspicion.

“And to you, this should not be so vile a place.
Nothing reproachful attaches to you by being
here.
And see, it is not so sad a place as one might think.
Look, there is the sky, and here is
the grass.”


“I know where I am,” he replied, but would say nothing more, and so I left him.


[...]

Some few days after this, I again obtained admission to the Tombs, and went through the corridors
in quest of Bartleby; but without finding him.


“I saw him coming from his cell not long ago,” said a turnkey, “may be he's gone to loiter in the
yards.”


So I went in that direction.


“Are you looking for the silent man?” said another turnkey passing me.
“Yonder he lies—sleeping
in the yard there.
'Tis not twenty minutes since I saw him lie down.”


The yard was entirely quiet.
It was not accessible to the common prisoners.
The surrounding
walls, of amazing thickness, kept off all sounds behind them.
The Egyptian character of the
masonry weighed upon me with its gloom.
But a soft imprisoned turf grew under foot.
The heart of
the eternal pyramids, it seemed, wherein, by some strange magic, through the clefts, grass-seed,
dropped by birds, had sprung.


Strangely huddled at the base of the wall, his knees drawn up, and lying on his side, his head
touching the cold stones, I saw the wasted Bartleby.
But nothing stirred.
I paused; then went
close up to him; stooped over, and saw that his dim eyes were open; otherwise he seemed
profoundly sleeping.
Something prompted me to touch him.
I felt his hand, when a tingling shiver
ran up my arm and down my spine to my feet.


The round face of the grub-man peered upon me now.
“His dinner is ready.
Won't he dine to-day,
either?
Or does he live without dining?”

“Lives without dining,” said I, and closed his eyes.


“Eh!—He's asleep, aint he?”


“With kings and counselors,” murmured I.

*
* * *
* * * *
There would seem little need for proceeding further in this history.
Imagination will readily
supply the meager recital of poor Bartleby's interment.
But ere parting with the reader, let me
say, that if this little narrative has sufficiently interested him, to awaken curiosity as to who
Bartleby was, and what manner of life he led prior to the present narrator's making his
acquaintance, I can only reply, that in such curiosity I fully share, but am wholly unable to
gratify it.
Yet here I hardly know whether I should divulge one little item of rumor, which came
to my ear a few months after the scrivener's decease.
Upon what basis it rested, I could never
ascertain; and hence, how true it is I cannot now tell.
But inasmuch as this vague report has not
been without certain strange suggestive interest to me, however sad, it may prove the same with
some others; and so I will briefly mention it.
The report was this: that Bartleby had been a
subordinate clerk in the Dead Letter Office at Washington, from which he had been suddenly
removed by a change in the administration.
When I think over this rumor, I cannot adequately
express the emotions which seize me.
Dead letters!
does it not sound like dead men?
Conceive a
man by nature and misfortune prone to a pallid hopelessness, can any business seem more fitted to
heighten it than that of continually handling these dead letters, and assorting them for the
flames?
For by the cart-load they are annually burned.
Sometimes from out the folded paper the
pale clerk takes a ring:—the finger it was meant for, perhaps, moulders in the grave; a bank-note
sent in swiftest charity:—he whom it would relieve, nor eats nor hungers any more; pardon for
those who died despairing; hope for those who died unhoping; good tidings for those who died
stifled by unrelieved calamities.
On errands of life, these letters speed to death.


Ah Bartleby!
Ah humanity!
